A challenge for all of Europe
Speaking in  German Bundestag, Chancellor   has reaffirmed that Germany must lead  way on  refugee issue. This is  only way to achieve a European solution.  sound financial policy of  German government is an excellent foundation on which to deal with  challenges of  moment.
Chancellor   speaks in  German Bundestag during  debate on  2016 budget
"Germany is in a good state of health," says  Chancellor during  budget debate
Photo: Bundesregierung/Kugler
During  general budget debate Chancellor   stressed that  economy is strong and that Germany is in a good state of health, thanks to  country’s sound financial and budgetary policy. With a view to  rising costs of caring for refugees,  Chancellor reaffirmed  government’s commitment to its medium-term financial planning goal of no new borrowing.   said, "Our sound financial position also allows us to respond to new challenges that occur suddenly."
Germany is helping

Never, since  Second World War, have so many people fled ir homes at once, said  . Up to 800,000 people will arrive in Germany this year as refugees and asylum-seekers, she said. Germany is helping, declared  Chancellor.
Now it is a question of "rolling up our sleeves and getting rid of all  obstacles that are in  way". n we can live peacefully with  people coming to Germany. But, it is quite clear, stressed  , "We cannot simply carry on as we have done to date."
 German government is doing its duty by providing an additional six billion euros in 2016, half of which will go to  federal states and local authorities. Germany can cope with  financial burden, because  country is currently in a state of robust economic health and domestic demand is holding up, in spite of  risks that can be seen at  level of  global economy.

Fighting ISIS

  touched on  instability in countries like Syria and Iraq, which she identified as root causes of  refugee movements. She recalled  support that Germany has provided, offering training to 3,000 members of  Iraqi security forces.  fight against IS also remains a major challenge, she added. She pointed out that some of  IS fighters come from Germany and or European countries.
 conflicts are happening on Europe’s doorstep, and y affect us directly, said  Chancellor. As a result, up to 800,000 people will come to Germany this year as refugees and asylum-seekers.  horrific images of dead children and  dreadful fate of so many people must make it clear where our responsibility lies, she said.
In this context   thanked  German navy which has already saved more than 7,200 refugees in  Mediterranean.  refugee situation, she said, is a challenge for  entire country. "Just as we responded swiftly to  financial crisis, we are responding to this challenge," said  .  German Bundestag is to approve a package of measures before  end of October.
European response needed

At  same time   called for a European response to  influx of individuals feeling ir homes, because this is not a problem that can be resolved at national level. What is needed is a mandatory distribution of refugees among EU member states on  basis of fair criteria. That is why re can be no ceilings on  number of asylums countries are willing to take in. This is a challenge for every European state. If Europe fails in  face of  refugee situation, one of  main intentions of  founders of  EU will have been lost, she said.
At  same time cooperation with African states and indeed with Turkey must be improved. As Syria’s immediate neighbour, Turkey has accepted a great deal of responsibility. And it is clear that  situation in Syria, Eritrea and Iraq will not change overnight. This clearly illustrates how domestic, foreign and development policy is interconnected, she said.
 mistakes of  1960s must not be repeated

 Chancellor listed  following fundamental challenges:
Swift assistance for and integration of asylum-seekers and civil war refugees.   said, "We must learn from  mistakes made in  1960s and forge ahead rapidly with integration." n, she said,  opportunities outweigh  risks.
Individuals coming to Germany to escape economic distress will not be allowed to stay.   said, "However difficult ir lives might be, this is an unpalatable truth that has to be told." y will be returned to ir home countries more rigorously than has hirto been  case.
We must explain to  people allowed to stay in Germany precisely what  rules are here.   said, re will be zero tolerance for any efforts to build parallel societies within Germany.
Zero tolerance for rabble-rousing, violence against refugee shelters or any xenophobic activities.   said, "Perpetrators will feel  full force of  law."
  declared her conviction that Germany must lead  way if European solutions are to be found.  challenge will be a long-term one, and it is vast. She is, however, more convinced than ever before that Germany can master it.
